1. get rufus from https://rufus.ie/en/, scroll down and look for the standard download version (rufus-x.x.exe).

2. run this in powershell to download the latest arch linux iso: Invoke-WebRequest -Uri "https://mirror.rackspace.com/archlinux/iso/latest/archlinux-x86_64.iso" -OutFile "$env:USERPROFILE\Downloads\archlinux.iso" -UseBasicParsing -Verbose

3. open rufus. plug in the usb drive. use these settings:

	device: select your usb drive

	boot selection: choose the archlinux iso

	partition scheme: GPT

	target system: UEFI (non-CSM)

	file system: FAT32 (it might change automatically to RAW if DD mode is selected)

4. when rufus asks about writing the iso, select DD Image mode (not ISO Image mode). DD mode writes the iso byte-for-byte exactly like linux expects.

5. enter bios menu on the laptop/pc. key depends on brand:

	HP: press Esc repeatedly at startup, then press F10 for BIOS setup
	
	Dell: press F2 at startup

	Asus: press F2 at startup

	Lenovo: press F2 at startup

6. in bios, go to boot options:

	disable secure boot (this allows unsigned operating systems like arch linux to boot)

	disable legacy boot (sometimes called legacy support or CSM support)

	make sure boot mode is set to UEFI only

	in UEFI boot order, move USB flash drive to the top of the list

7. save and exit bios

boot from the usb. make sure to select the UEFI version of the usb if given multiple options (it will say something like "UEFI: your usb name").

if the usb was flashed correctly and bios is set correctly, you will reach the arch linux installer menu. select the first option to boot into arch.


keyword explanations:

uefi: unified extensible firmware interface. modern replacement for old BIOS. controls the hardware before an operating system loads. required for secure boot, faster boot times, and better security.

legacy boot: the old BIOS-style booting method. some laptops allow legacy boot for compatibility with very old operating systems. for modern linux installs like arch, legacy boot should be disabled.

secure boot: a uefi feature that only allows operating systems signed with approved certificates to boot. arch linux is open-source and not signed by microsoft, so secure boot must be disabled.

dd mode: a flashing method that copies the iso file bit-by-bit exactly as it is onto the usb stick. this is required for linux distros like arch that expect a raw disk image, not a windows-style file copy.

iso image mode: a flashing method that extracts and copies files individually from the iso. useful for windows installers but not good for linux installers like arch.

init: the first process the linux kernel tries to start after booting. if linux cannot find init, it crashes with "no init found" and kernel panic.

kernel panic: a safety stop when the linux kernel hits a critical problem it cannot recover from. often happens if boot media is bad or filesystem is missing.


(30 mins)